---
title: Essay 1
layout: about
permalink: /essay-01.html
---
**Women and Labor Politics in the Early 20th century                

Introduction:
 
At the turn of the 20th century the divide between classes became sharply apparent.  Industrialization easily divided the working class from the middle to upper classes and created a hierarchy of control. The main goals of managers and factory owners was to maintain profits in order to survive the competitive markets in which their products were sold.  Regulations pertaining to the health, safety, and well-being of the workers had not been established.  Companies may have created their own safety guidelines but were not forced to adhere to governmental regulations. Factory owners were also in a ‘survival of the fittest’ dilemma.  Capital gains were put before safety standards and factory buildings lacked safety codes to prevent hazardous fires or chemical spills. The Triangle Shirtwaist Fire of 1911 is a primary example of this lack of foresight/safety regulations when a fire erupted in the factory and many of women garment workers became trapped inside the building due to a narrow fire escape, and locked doors prevented them being able to escape. 146 factory workers were lost in this fire. It is noted that the women who worked in the Triangle factory were forced to work 12 hour days, every day of the week.  In 1909 the ‘Ladies International Garment Worker’s Union’ led a strike asking for better working conditions.  Some of these ladies who joined the strike worked at the Triangle Factory.  Rose Schneiderman is known for her involvement in this 1909 strike. Her reaction to the Triangle fire on April 2,1911,reflects a call to action on behalf of all workers’ and especially the lives lost in the fire…. “I can't talk fellowship to you who are gathered here. Too much blood has been spilled. I know from my experience it is up to the working people to save themselves. The only way they can save themselves is by a strong working-class movement.” {1}  

Ms. Schneiderman’s intuition was relevant considering how labor issues were causing many conflicts between workers and employers. The Progressive Movement of this time began to address a culmination of issues at hand for workers and womens' rights. When researching through this time frame, a distinct pattern can be traced between the women suffrage movement, and efforts to improve women labor rights as well.  There is a broad list of many women who contributed to the social and political work of social welfare reform during these difficult times of great wealth inequality.  Women needed to influence public perception to shift governmental policy. Women suffrage was important to level the political stage in order for women to have an equal voice in shaping public policy.  Both men and women workers deserved the right to feel safe at work and be rewarded with proper wages to meet the costs of living.

New Yorker Frances Perkins, aged 31, witnessed the horror of the Triangle Factory fire. Her senses were already in tune with the issues of womens' rights, fighting for suffrage, and the indignity of child labor.  The fire affected her on many levels.. Frances knew certain truths about the conditions working class people lived in.. Elements of poverty and progress were plain to see in the cities. Factory work required long hours; managers put speed above safety and children were allowed to work alongside adults in dangerous conditions. Safe and sanitary housing was scarce in cities throughout the height of this revolution; some families crowded together in basements, and city sewage systems were not fully developed. It is estimated that by 1904, one in three people living in cities were close to starving to death.{2} The pioneering work of Jacob Riis in “How the Other Half Lives”, (1890) chronicled the squalid living conditions among the Tenements in New York City.  Riis's photography captured the social realism of industrial America and the misery inherently effecting the poor working class. This documentation could then reach the moral conscience of the middle and upper class. In many urban centers reformers could gather and discuss solutions to alleviate these circumstances.

Frances Perkins and Florence Kelley met at Mount Holyoke College. Frances later earned a master’s degree in economics and sociology from Colombia University. Florence also studied at Cornell University and also studied law in Zurich, Switzerland.  When Florence was a young girl her father took her to factories where she witnessed child labor.  Her father, William D. Kelley, was an abolitionist, and founder of the Republican Party. W. Kelley was deeply opposed to child labor and taught Florence about the harsh truths concerning economics and human suffering. From 1891 to 1899 Kelley lived at Hull House settlement in Chicago and worked alongside Jane Addams.  Addams, the founder of Hull House, (1889), set a social welfare precedent by providing poor immigrants and their families a place to seek shelter, education, and child care for their children. Addam's contribution to social welfare reform continued up to her passing, showing her unwavering dedication to social issues... To continue with Florence Kelley’s achievements, it is very worth mentioning that she became the first woman factory inspector in the United States.  She was appointed by Governor John Peter Altgeld in 1893. [3] In 1899, she founded and served as the first general secretary of the National Consumers League.  She held this position for 30 years. As the representative for the NCL, she helped prepare the Brandeis Brief, which was in defense of the 10 hour work day.  This brief gave strength to the Muller v. Oregon case in 1908 in which a court considered lowering the workday specifically in defense of women, and not men.  This case was the first of its’ kind because it used social science as evidence to support the argument to lessen the workday for women based on physical limitations and consideration for mothers to attend to their children. 

Frances began to walk in the footsteps of her mentor as she also became involved in labor politics. Her eventual rise to become Secretary of Labor under President Franklin Roosevelt’s administration was influenced by the work of Kelley.  During her time as New York industrial commissioner in 1929, Kelley wrote, “there will be less death, misery and poverty because you are at the helm.” [4] 

The economic crash of 1929 gave way to the Great Depression.  Unemployment increased rapidly as well as psychological despair for so many average citizens confronting the reality of the depression.  As Industrial Commissioner, Frances worked closely with Roosevelt who served as governor of New York from 1929 to the point of his presidential election.  (Both bearing witness to the great economic upheaval..) On March 30, 1930, FDR became the first American governor to stress that unemployment was a major national risk. {5}  Perkins took these ideas into account and realized that the economic depression was propelling the nation to find greater solutions to labor issues.  In 1932, she became Roosevelt’s first women cabinet member as Secretary of Labor. During this time, she proposed ideas for unemployment insurance, minimum wage laws, prohibitions on child labor, and eventually social security for the elderly.  Most of these ideas blossomed into fruition.  In 1938, the Fair Labor Standards Act was passed.  Frances played a significant role in shaping these reforms and providing the average citizen with a solid foundation to live upon. The act established the first minimum wage and overtime laws, defined the 40 hour work week and restricted the use of child labor.  As a women who clearly defied the gender limitations of her time, Frances’s work as Secretary of Labor was truelly exceptional.  Florence, Addams, and Schneiderman were also brave women- unafraid of obstacles, driven by a relentless passion to improve society and assure women their rights’ to influence American politics and governmental policy. 


% include feature/image.html filename="Word cloud generated from 1938 State of the Union Address.png" alt="1938 Word Cloud" %}

   


Citations:

1.  Jewish Women’s Archive. “Rose Schneiderman’s April 2, 1911 speech.” (jwa.org)

2.  Library of Congress.  Cities During the Progressive Era.

3.  Florence Kelley.  http://florencekelley.northwestern.edu/

4.  Kirsten Downey.  *“The Woman Behind the New Deal”, FDR’s Secretary of Labor and his Moral Conscience”. 2009.






